[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Leaving behind everything
we thought we knew and diving
into the unknown.
This is how our
investigation into fluoride
started, trying to forget any
preconceived ideas that we
had about what we thought
to be a safe product.
It was in the archives of the
Schneider Steelworks in Creusot
that we found the first
piece of evidence that
confirmed our worries, a report
from 1970 entitled "Pollution."
In the report, they
talk about fluoride,
a mineral used to melt
steam in the tall chimneys
and of toxic smoke.
We saw pictures of cows
with a mysterious illness,
fluorosis, an illness that is
apparently caused by fluoride.
In the surrounding
region, red puffs of smoke
packed with fluoride filled
the sky before falling
into the fields below.
Few people remember this, except
for some elderly residents,
such as Francois
Drozdowsky, a retired
laborer at the steelworks
neighboring his house.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> How could a product that
appears harmless to most of us
turn out to be so noxious?
By aberration?
Turning a blind eye?
These questions form the
backbone of our investigation
in several countries.
France, the USA, England,
Germany, the Faroe Islands.
All around the world, people
were sounding the alarm,
but it was only in 2010 that the
WHO decided to class fluoride
among the 10 chemicals
that pose the greatest
threat to public health,
alongside asbestos, arsenic,
and dioxins.
It becomes toxic from
as little as 1 milligram
per day for children
and 4 mg for adults.
And the maximum dose
is easily reached,
given the large number of
everyday products containing
fluoride.
What's more surprising
is, mixed with carbon gas,
you can find it in our frying
pans, our clothes, our pizza
boxes.
And even at a very low
dose, their toxicity
is considered to be extremely
concerning by scientists
from around the world.
One professor, who knows more
than most about fluoride,
wrote her thesis on the topic.
Anne-Marie Musset heads one
of the biggest dental surgery
units in France.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Here at the
University of Strasbourg,
the team often encounters
cases of fluoride poisoning,
and for a worrying reason.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Professor Musset Knows
why the instruction to use
a pea-sized drop of toothpaste
was enforced on manufacturers
following a law
passed in March 2009.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Fluorosis, that word again.
This mysterious illness that
affected the [INAUDIBLE]
in Creusot in the 1970s,
also affects humans.
At very high doses, it leads
to serious skeletal problems.
At lower doses, it causes what
is known as dental fluorosis.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Although fluoride is
supposed to protect your teeth,
when it's ingesting in excess,
it has the opposite effect.
And the sources of fluoride
intoxication are numerous.
Fluoride is found in
lots of everyday things.
In lots of table
salts, in toothpaste,
in some bottled water, and
even sometimes in tap water.
And you can very quickly exceed
the maximum recommended dose.
That's why since 2008 bottled
water containing more than 1.5
milligrams of fluoride
per liter are required
to print on the bottles
that the water is not
suitable for newborns or
children under seven years old.
We found six brands of
water, almost all sparkling,
that exceeded this limit.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> When Professor Musset sees
patients and feels that it is
necessary to prescribe them
fluoride to prevent dental
cavities, she systematically
undertakes an overview
of their fluoride consumption.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> In an ideal world, all
doctors would evaluate
their patients'
exposure to fluoride.
Rebecca would dry her eyes
after the scare of a visit
to the dentist, would go
home, and my investigation
would stop there.
But as you can imagine,
there's more to it than that.
The study, conducted a few
years ago by Professor Musset,
showed that in four to
12-year-olds, for example,
more than 40% of doctors
prescribe fluoride drops
without first evaluating
their exposure to fluoride.
And the result?
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Why are doctor so quick
to prescribe fluoride?
Through ignorance?
Unless they had been misled
by certain industrialists.
Industrialists, who, 50 years
ago, moved heaven and earth
to promote what was at first
just a cumbersome poison.
It was Alcoa who first brought
fluoride to fame in the 1930s.
At the time, the major
aluminum producer in the USA
had a serious problem.
They used fluoride
to extract aluminum,
but this process
produced toxic fumes.
The threat of a court
case hung over them.
In 1931, the company launched
a discreet investigation
into the cases of
dental fluorosis
that surrounded their
manufacturing plant in Messina,
in the north of the country,
and reported the results
in a confidential
internal letter.
"We have questioned three
of our local dentists
on the prevalence of
mottled enamel in Messina.
All of the dentists
stated that they
have treated such cases here."
This letter has been read by
two men, Christopher Bryson,
an investigative
journalist who has spent
10 years of his life
researching the subject,
and Paul Connett, an
anti-fluoride activist
from the United States who
knows why Alcoa managed
to avoid any legal proceedings
due to the fluoride pollution.
>> The problem for industry
is, if your pollutant has
a biomarker, it's easier
to convince a jury that
the company is responsible
for this other damage.
The dental fluorosis would
not be a huge loss settlement,
but if you damage the person's
bones, if their arthritis,
or they've got bone
fractures, or other things
like lowering thyroid
function, then you're
into much higher settlements.
I think Alcoa knew
all of that the moment
that they found
that fluoride was
the cause of dental fluorosis.
>> In the aluminum factories,
fluoride was a killing poison.
It was causing workers all
sorts of health problems.
Around the aluminum
factories, animals and people
were being poisoned.
Alcoa needed a defense
against these actual lawsuits
and potential lawsuits.
They needed something good
to say about fluoride.
>> Alcoa found the answer to
their problem at the Mellon
Institute, an applied science
laboratory in Pittsburgh that
the aluminum giants had created
themselves in order to serve
the interests of
the industrialists.
The Institute had already been
used to legitimize asbestos,
for example.
In 1935, a scientist
named Gerald Cox
was working at the Institute.
He was conducting a study on
teeth using laboratory rats.
One man came out of the
shadows to approach him.
He was called Francis Frary.
He was the research
director at Alcoa,
and he strongly suggested to Cox
that he should include fluoride
in his study.
>> Here we have the chief
chemist of Alcoa actually
suggesting to him, in
his animal experiments,
that he look into to see whether
fluoride was good for teeth.
So clearly they were
thinking we need
to find a beneficial
use for fluoride
to compensate for the
public's knowledge
that fluoride is
damaging health.
They needed--
>> The scientist from the
Mellon Institute made a mistake
in admitting that his study had
been influenced by Alcoa many
years later in correspondence
with a historian.
"The first time I ever
gave fluoride a thought
was in response to
a question posed
by Dr. Francis Frary, director
of research for Alcoa."
The poison had become a remedy.
Four years later,
the Mellon Institute
announced in a
scientific journal
that fluoride is the element
most probably responsible
for improved caries resistance.
>> Within a few
very short years,
triggered by the suggestion
of Francis Frary at Alcoa,
our perception of fluoride
goes from poison to something
that's good for teeth.
>> And that's how a sneaky
maneuver rewrote the history
of fluoride.
Nobody thought to
challenge it for decades.
After the war, it was used
in a number of products.
In the drinking water
of some countries,
in salt, in chewing gum.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> And of course, in toothpaste,
creating adverts that stuck
in the minds of generations.
Fluoride became a friend
who wished you well.
Even going as far as becoming
the way to find true love.
It's better to
laugh than to cry.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> France also prescribed
massive amounts of fluoride
to children in the
form of tablets,
and to infants in drops
to be taken from birth.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Up until 2008, when professor
Goldberg and a few experts from
the French agency for the
security of health products
asked doctors, to
everyone's surprise,
to go against previous practice.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Calling into question
the quasi-religious belief
in fluoride was not
easy at the time,
and Professor Goldberg
didn't mince his words.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> But the medical profession
was not the only one to be
misled.
Certain health
authorities also showed
a certain laissez-faire
attitude towards this poison.
On a morning like this,
the Bordeaux vines
were bathed in sunlight by
the first rays of the day.
It is so beautiful
that we can almost
forget that here the ground
isn't as kind as it looks.
Fluoride is naturally present
in the rocks beneath the earth
and contaminates the
water, making it higher
than the recommended limits.
A few years ago, a local
resident sounded the alarm.
A mother realized
that for many years
her family had drunk water that
was over the recommended limit
without being warned
of the dangers.
Her daughter had developed
dental fluorosis.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> White patches, teeth that
are crumbling and stained
in places, a mild stage
2 fluorosis diagnosed
by an expert.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> This irreversible fluorosis
is difficult for a teenager
to deal with, but she
avoided the worst.
Because around 20 studies
throughout the world
have shown that
fluorated water can
cause neurological
disabilities in children.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> For a long time, the local
water providers have delivered
a non-compliant water supply,
which regularly goes over
the limit of 1.5 milligrams
of fluoride per liter
for children.
However, until 2010 the
residents of the region
received detailed
analyses of water quality
with no warnings about
the level of fluoride.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Alexandra [? Thibault ?]
made an official complaint.
According to her, the problem
had been known about for years
by the regional health authority
and the water federations.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Why did the regional
health authority,
the water quality police,
not warn the parents
in the affected areas?
Why did they let
children drink water that
was dangerous to their health?
That day, Gisele
Dejean was waiting
for us and to respond
to our questions.
In the office of the
state sanitary authority,
there was a colorful
poster pinned to the wall,
showing the areas with high
concentrations of fluoride.
Gisele Dejean had also
prepared a pile of documents.
Everything seemed clear,
but on my computer
I had documents
saved by Alexandra
[? Thibault, ?]
showing that there
were no warnings until 2010.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> So that's the thing.
The water police
were distributing
non-compliant water,
and the population
had to guess that it wasn't
suitable for drinking.
Gisele Dejean ended up admitting
this lack of information.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Why did the regional health
authority not insist that
the water syndicates provide
a compliant water supply?
Are my questions
legitimate or exasperating?
Both, it seems.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Absolutely, but it
took 17 years of waiting.
In June 2016, a
defluorization plant
was constructed in Margaux.
As for the rest of France,
according to the health
minister, non-compliant
water with excessive amounts
of fluoride had been distributed
at least once in 22 regions.
This drink that
we trust, that we
drink more than anything else,
was not the only thing that
surprised us.
It's well known that the English
like to do things differently
to other countries.
That's why two researchers
at the University of Derby
decided to go against
tradition and take a look
at a British institution, tea.
>> This is a black blend.
This is a pure blend.
This comes from a
single location.
And the economy blend.
And that's the ones
which we have found
a high level of fluoride in.
>> Is tea good for our health?
That was the question
until the two researchers
showed that tea contained
high levels of fluoride.
For their study, Paul
Lynch and Aradhana Mehra
studied around 30
different brands of tea
with a fine tooth comb to
look at their exact amount
of fluoride.
The results were surprising.
6 out of 10 teas contained
more than 4 milligrams
of fluoride per adult per day,
this famous limit beyond which
our health is at risk.
>> What we found was that pure
blended teas had around two,
between one and two milligrams
per liter of fluoride.
The oolong and pure blends had
a slightly lower but comparable
value.
The black blends, which are
the main big commercial blends,
they were around three
to four milligrams
per liter of fluoride.
The green teas were
very comparable,
but the economic blends
were significantly higher.
They ranged from between about
five up to eight in some cases.
>> But how does fluoride
make its way into our teas?
A quick demonstration is
better than a long explanation.
>> So here is a tea
bag, which I've opened,
which is from economy tea.
I'm going to weigh two grams
and add 100 milliliters of water
to it.
I'll first stir it,
and you can already
see that you're getting
a cup of tea from this.
This time, the
fluoride from the tea
is coming out into the water.
In two minutes, you
can get a majority.
Most of the fluoride
will come out
into the infusion
in two minutes time.
Very, very, very, very little.
>> Two minutes is all we need
to exceed the toxic limits
of fluoride.
>> For this sample, it is
showing me that it has got
seven milligrams per liter.
Which is very high,
because you can
get more than they required
fluoride of your daily intake
just by drinking
three mugs of tea.
So you can get up to 150%
of your daily requirement
just through that economy tea,
in terms of the three mugs.
>> If, like me, you are
wondering why the economy tea
contains more fluoride
than the others,
we have to follow Aradhana
Mehra into the university
greenhouses.
This is where she keeps
the tea plants that
are able to absorb
fluoride from the ground.
>> The tea that is collected
for consumption or for use
for the tea is the top part,
the bud and the top two leaves.
And this is the tea which
makes good quality tea.
The tea is collected
and picked by hand.
On the other hand, if you are
going to use the lower tea
leaves, they are going
to be more mature,
and they will have
more fluoride in it.
So to make economy
teas, you might even
have mechanical harvesting,
and therefore tea
is just collected like that from
the top, which will obviously
not include the top
bud and the two leaves
but other mature leaves as well.
And all of that, when it
is processed and ground,
that becomes your
economy tea that we
buy from the supermarket.
And therefore it's got a
high load of fluoride in it.
>> In English and
American tea drinkers,
a handful of studies have shown
cases of skeletal fluorosis,
a disease where fluoride
takes the place of calcium.
The bones become fragile
and break with no reason.
>> I think that they don't
think it's bad for health.
I think it's one of those
things which is very
neutral, that people drink it.
They think it's
just safe product.
Absolutely.
But I think like so many
other things in our lives,
if you drink too much
tea, drink tea to excess,
it would be dangerous.
>> Drink less tea, ban
certain types of water,
some types of salt?
After all, it doesn't seem
that difficult to get rid
of fluoride, right?
But it's not going to
be beaten that easily.
All over the planet, there
is a chemical product
that is omnipresent and
which nobody can escape from,
a compound that causes
illnesses much more
severe than fluorosis.
>> PFC compounds are chemicals
that are used to make outdoor
gear waterproof.
Many manufacturers of
weatherproof jackets, trousers,
and shoes use PFCs to make their
products more water repellent.
>> Here is our old friend
hiding under a new name, PFCs,
or perfluocarbons.
Greenpeace sounded the alarm.
Associated with carbon
and chemically modified,
fluoride becomes
extremely dangerous.
Scientists from Greenpeace went
to every corner of the globe
to take samples and found PFCs
even in the furthest reaches.
A chemical compound
created in factories
spread around the world.
>> During production, those
tiny particles not only end up
in nearby bodies of water, but
are dispersed across the globe
as gases or fine
particulate matter.
They travel with the wind and
eventually drift back to earth.
>> These days, PFCs are
rattling the scientific world.
In 2013, they were
identified as being
priority dangerous
substances by Europe.
>> This compounds,
they are accumulated.
That means they
stay in your body.
They go into the organs,
like kidneys or liver
and stay there
for several years,
2.5 years up to nine years,
they stay in your body.
>> This ex-chemist has
made PFC his pet hate.
Since he joined
Greenpeace in Germany,
Manfred Santen has
worked tirelessly
to track down what are known
as perfluorinate compounds.
Because PFCs are hidden in many
of our daily household items,
Mandred Santen has undertaken
an in-depth investigation.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> A few weeks ago, he bought a
large variety of products from
around the world in order to
test them in his laboratory.
>> We have a collection here.
We have, for
example, a backpack.
This could be
impregnated with PFC.
And a sleeping bag that
could contain PFC. We
have a shoe over here.
And we also have, for
example, pizza boxes that
could contain PFC
inside, to make it easier
to get the pizza out, so that
it does not attach to the paper,
to the box.
That is the only
reason, of course.
>> Yeah.
>> We have some muffin paper
baking molds that contain--
can contain PFC, to
make them for oil
and fat resistant or repellent.
And we have some microwave
popcorn packaging
that could contain PFC.
>> Why do they use it in the
sleeping bag, for example?
>> Good question.
I don't know.
Makes no sense.
Water repellent in
the sleeping bag
is not needed,
because you will not
sleep in the rain with
the bag, always inside.
You don't need PFC
in sleeping Bags
and you don't know if it
is a health risk or not.
You don't know exactly, because
if you sleep in that bag
and are sweating or
something like that,
or it's very hot in
summertime, for example,
and the PFC are in the
tent, they can evaporate
and then you breathe them.
So this is not necessary.
>> Does the compound evaporate?
Is it absorbed into food?
Scientists are investigating
these unanswered questions,
but one thing has
already been proved.
The manufacturing and the
use of perfluorated compounds
in factories around the world
have serious consequences
for our health.
We had never imagined
how many kilometers
we would travel in order to
conduct our investigation.
So one day, I found myself
in deepest West Virginia,
following the tracks of
perfluorated compounds
in Paul Brooks's
brand new pickup.
The doctor wished to show
me around Parkersburg
and talk to me
about a subject that
haunts the inhabitants of this
small town in Eastern America.
Here everyone knows about PFCs.
perfluorated compounds
or the main products
of a plant in the region.
>> That the plant?
>> That's the plant right there.
For years, they pumped
that stuff into the river.
They called it
poop, human feces.
They said we pooped
into the river.
That was in their documents, in
their own corporate documents.
>> Here is the plant that
had secretly defecated
into the river.
Welcome to the biggest
production site
in the world, owned
by DuPont de Nemours,
a legend of the
chemical industry, who
invented Teflon thanks to PFCs.
>> Even burned food
won't stick to Teflon,
so it's always easy to clean.
If it has DuPont Teflon.
>> Let me tell you a story.
Because behind the commercial
attractions of a non-stick pan
hides a tragedy.
To produce Teflon,
for over 50 years
DuPont used a particular
perfluorated compound, PFOA
or C8, creating toxic
smoke contaminating
all the local water
sources and the drinking
water of the entire region.
>> If you look at the
science, it takes a very,
very small amount of C8
to cause a problem, OK?
And remember, C8 has a
halflife of about four years
in the body.
>> Unfortunately, it's
Parkersberg's history that
allows us to understand the
impact of PFCs on our health.
A living laboratory
for all the inhabitants
of the planet, who,
without being aware of it,
drink and breathe
perfluorated compounds.
In the region, the drinking
water was heavily contaminated.
More and more
inhabitants became ill.
In 2005, 70,000 people
had their blood analyzed.
The study showed that PFOA
was present in their blood,
often at a high dose.
>> So I take probably, let's
see, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
16.
>> 16 years ago, Earl
Bodkins' life changed forever.
One by one, the different
diagnoses piled up.
Thyroid problems, high
cholesterol, and worst of all,
ulcerous colitis.
This disease, similar
to Crohn's disease,
has made his life hell.
The medics suggest
removing his colon,
but Earl cannot
make up his mind.
So he eats almost
nothing during the day,
so that he isn't
bothered whilst at work.
>> Usually I just
have some toast,
and I'll drink a little bit
of coffee and maybe something
cold.
I don't drink much orange juice
because of the acid in it,
but I usually have about three
or four trips to the bathroom
before I leave in the morning.
>> Every day is torture.
Eating anything
leaves him indisposed.
>> I just have a snack
sometimes during the day,
some crackers or
something to that effect.
But the only real meal I
have is in the evening.
>> For a long time, Earl
just thought it was bad luck.
The illnesses had probably
just happened by chance.
It took his wife Gwen some
time to make the link.
The DuPont trial started
to make the headlines,
but the plant was 70
kilometers away from them.
It was so far away.
It couldn't be that.
Until 2005, when the
couple received a letter.
>> They came out with saying
I don't know exactly how many
years ago where you go down for
this screening and they'd pay
you $400 a person or something
to go get the bloodwork.
And everybody, I think,
in the community went out,
participated in it.
A lot of people did, because
they were gonna pay them,
you know?
We had no idea what
would come out of it,
but anyway, so we went
through the first testing
and the second testing.
>> Gwen and Earl had in fact
joined a study of 70,000
inhabitants in the region.
The largest scientific study
on the effect of PFOA on humans
was conducted by
three epidemiologists
from reputable English
and American universities.
In 2012, David Savitz
and his colleagues
published their results.
They were unequivocal.
>> Our assignment was to judge
whether there was a probable
link between exposure
to PFOA and disease.
There were five diseases where
we did judge the evidence
as indicating a link between
exposure and a health problem.
And those included heart
disease, the various forms.
We weren't able to
be more specific,
but various forms
of heart disease.
Kidney cancer, testicular
cancer, thyroid disease,
ulcerative colitis, a
disease of the intestines,
and pre-eclampsia, which is
hypertension during pregnancy.
>> [SINGING]
>> Hey.
>> Hi, Earl.
How are you?
>> Hi, babe.
OK.
How are you doing?
>> Doing good.
>> What are you into there?
>> Oh, I've been
looking at pictures.
And we've got so many that
need to be put in albums.
It's awful.
>> Earl and Gwen joined a
collective lawsuit against
DuPont de Nemours, as if in
retribution for the theft
of the wonderful life they'd
had before Earl got ill.
Gwen says that she
lives in the moment
and refuses to think
about the future.
Her husband, however, sees
the future as a tragicomedy.
>> I'll continue taking
drugs one of these days.
My heart will go away.
Gwen will live to be 120.
>> I'm gonna live to be 125.
>> Yeah.
>> Where'd you get 120?
>> And she'll have two or three
other guys drinking beer out
of my refrigerator.
>> Uh-huh.
Yeah, right.
You can eliminate all that.
>> I don't know.
You can't dwell on
it all the time,
because it would
keep you messed up.
>> It would keep you angry.
You'd be mad, you know?
>> It'll keep you depressed.
Yeah.
DuPont knew what
they were doing.
It's criminal charges, because--
I get mad and I get
upset with them.
>> Yes, DuPont knew
about the dangers of PFC,
and had known for a while.
>> We are now prepared
to destroy more rapidly
and completely every productive
enterprise the Japanese have
in any city.
>> In 1945, the USA had just
dropped the first atomic bomb
on Hiroshima.
A few years before,
the Manhattan Project
had been launched,
a secret defense
mission to construct factories
throughout the country
to produce the bomb.
Engineers found a way to enrich
uranium thanks to fluoride,
an extremely
corrosive substance,
which needed the precious
input of industrialists, DuPont
and their PFC-based Teflon.
>> Fluoride was essential
in manufacturing the uranium
atomic bomb.
Giant, huge
quantities of fluoride
were mixed with uranium in a
gas called uranium hexafluoride.
And that gas was
used to separate
the explosive
fraction of uranium
from the non-explosive fraction.
They required trucks
and tankers which
could resist the corrosive
power of the fluoride gases.
The one thing that they found
that would protect steel
from corrosive fluoride
influence was Teflon.
Teflon was something
that DuPont had
an expertise in manufacturing.
So DuPont's
expertise in fluoride
was really the secret weapon
that allowed the United States
to build the atomic bomb.
>> DuPont had in fact
invented Teflon in its Jackson
laboratory a few years earlier.
Their employees worked secretly
for the Manhattan Project,
but serious medical
problems started
appearing wherever the
perfluorated compounds were
handled.
In this recently declassified
document from November 1944,
sent to Col. Warren, the leader
of the Manhattan Project,
the army worries that the
affair would be divulged.
"Some of these men were
definitely undesirable workers
on this particular project.
They have spread the word
that transfer to these areas
is more or less an exile
to Devil's Island."
>> Labor organizers and workers
were agitating because of how
many injuries there had been
and how scared the workers were
of handling these manifestly
dangerous chemicals.
There were deaths.
There were terrible burns.
There were exposures
on a very large scale.
DuPont were well
aware of how poisonous
the chemicals were that they
were using during World War II.
>> Since then, a lot of water
has passed under the bridge,
and Teflon has become a
beloved household name.
And then one day, studies
showed that cooking pans let out
toxic fumes at
high temperatures.
Yes, PFCs are everywhere, in our
pans, our duvets, our carpets,
in the air, in our water.
According to a study by the
American health authorities,
98% of Americans
have perfluorated
compounds in their blood.
And you don't need to
live next to a factory
to be contaminated.
The proof can be found
in a country that
should be free of all pollution,
in a corner of paradise.
It is probably one of the most
sumptuous places on the planet,
these lost islands
between the Norwegian sea
and the North Atlantic
Ocean, the Faroe Islands.
Life here would be peaceful
if scientists had not
found PFC in the blood
of most of the residents
of the archipelago,
including the children.
>> [SPEAKING FAROESE]
>> Over five years, this
scientist studied the blood
of 650 children on the island.
Pal Weihe discovered a
manner of contamination
that he had never suspected.
>> Our surprise was that
breastfeeding was so important
for the actual concentration
of PFC in the child,
that breastfeeding was a
main contributor to the PFC
concentration in
the small children.
>> The deeper Pal Weihe
went into his study,
the more the results
became worrying.
He showed that the longer
women breastfed their child,
the higher the concentration
of perfluorated compounds
increased in the baby's blood.
>> Here's one with just
a short breastfeeding.
Sorry.
And there the
concentration is only 5.3.
Let's take the person with the
longest duration of 12 months.
12 months of exclusive
breastfeeding, that person,
the first person here.
Let's go in and find what
the concentration of PFC
was in the blood of the child.
That was 10.1.
That is in the high level.
>> These results are concerning,
as the immune system is very
vulnerable in the first
few months of life.
Four years ago,
Pal Weihe conducted
a study looking at
children and PFCs,
and indeed showed
a stronger effect
on the organism's
defense mechanisms.
>> So for every doubling
of PFC at the age of five,
there was a reduction of about
50% of the antibody formation
at age seven.
We don't know, really,
what that means,
but it could be from
infectious diseases.
In the worst case
scenario, to take
cancer and autoimmune diseases.
>> This study was alarming
to the mothers on the island,
because here breastfeeding
is a religion.
97% of mothers
breastfeed their child.
Jonrit Halling breastfed
her two sons for a year.
>> [SPEAKING FAROESE]
>> But for her third
child, who is on its way,
she is almost sure that
she won't do the same.
>> [SPEAKING FAROESE]
>> I could not have done it
in another way back then,
because I didn't knew better.
But now I think
for my next child,
I will think about
how long I am going
to breastfeed, the duration.
At least four months, I think.
Maybe half year, but not longer.
>> A few years ago, Jonrit
Halling was able to have
a blood test in order to
know her levels of PFC,
because she is a scientist
and was working on a study
on the subject.
We could all have this
test, but it is expensive,
because it is only conducted
in specialized laboratories.
Jonrit Halling was not
surprised to discover
that she was contaminated,
probably alongside all mothers
on the planet.
Since then, PFCs have
put into question
the benefits of breastfeeding.
>> I think it's a shame, because
of course breastfeeding is
the most natural thing,
and it is still, I think,
the best for your baby.
And as an individual,
it's very hard
to do anything to
avoid this exposure.
And also, if you buy clothes
and shoes for children,
it's very difficult to avoid.
>> Difficult, but
not impossible.
Five years ago, Adidas was
strongly rebuked by Greenpeace.
Through an international
campaign named Detox,
the ecologists attempted to
force both Adidas and Nike
from using dangerous
chemicals, including PFCs.
At the headquarters
of Adidas in Germany,
you won't find anybody
who will tell you
that it was this campaign
that led to the brand changing
its products.
But after all, does
it really matter?
The group was the first
to attack the use of PFCs.
That earned them a quick visit.
Steve Richardson has set
himself the challenge
of having a 99% PFC-free range
by the 31st of December 2017.
He's already working on it.
>> The vast majority
of Adidas product,
over 90% do not contain PFCs.
It's products like these
outdoor garments, which
can be used as a
performance t-shirt,
things like our football
jerseys or uniforms
for sports like wrestling or
tennis don't contain PFCs.
>> But a part of the range,
like weather-proof jackets,
ski garments, or swimming
costumes are still posing
a problem for Him with these
products that are sometimes
in permanent contact with water,
leaving out PFCs makes them
much less effective.
>> We built these jackets with
half PFC-free material and half
PFC material, so we could
compare the functionality
in the same conditions.
And we've asked our-- we had
our athletes wear those out
in the rain, and this can show
a little bit of what we saw.
When we spray water
onto the PFC-free side,
it starts to penetrate in and
actually wick into the fabric
very quickly.
Whereas on this side
still containing PFCs,
the water beads on the surface
for a much longer time.
It's very difficult to find
a replacement that works.
So that's why we've engaged
with the chemical industry
and even collaborated
with other apparel brands
to try to find solutions that
can work for our consumers.
>> The majority of
industrialists have not yet
bothered to conduct these
long and expensive research
projects.
During my filming, Greenpeace
received the results
of their samples, and the search
for perfluorated compounds
was unfortunately very fruitful.
Out of 40 products, only
four didn't contain any.
>> This has been analyzed.
This is a tent bought in
Russia, and we found PFOA
in really high concentrations.
So 12 micrograms per
square meter fabric.
That's a lot, because we say
it should not be more than one.
>> For a number of years now,
a few countries have called
for a definitive ban on PFOA.
To get around this future
ban, industrialists
have already replaced it with
other perfluorated compounds
whilst assuring that these
ones are not dangerous.
There is still a long but
necessary battle ahead
to rid the planet of this
authorized toxic companion.
[MUSIC PLAYING]